---
title: "Tantra by Hugh B. Urban"
authors:
  - author: "Carvaka88"
  - email: "carvaka88@gmail.com"
---

Alberuni and Marco Polo describe groups of yogis as well as rasayana with goals of "logevity and immortality", they are not described as "Tantra".  

Jones (1790) lumps "tantras" with Mantras, Agama and Nigams Sastras, he compares Kali to the goddess Diana. Colebrook ... tantras as the antipode of the Vedas.  Vedas were supposed to represent pristine monotheistic past whereas rituals from Puranas and Tantras embody polytheism and idolatory>

This is an example of progression from Indomania to Indophonia, under the influence of Christian and Evangelical who wanted to emanciapate natives socially and culturally.

'''

**Source: Tantra: Sex, Secrecy, Politics, and Power in the Study of Religion**

(page 45)

\... the colonial era witnessed a clear "trend toward conceiving of a new entiry called Tantrism as a specific modality of Indian religious experience" ... which assimilated the diverse body of texts ... and the vast body of traditions into a singular universal entity.  

The European fascination with Tantra, I will argue, is very much a part of this larget preoccupation with sexuality and its aberrations in the Western imagination.

(page 46)

Indeed, discourse on Tantra became a central element in the narrative of Indian history: namely, the widely accepted narrative of the decline of medieval Hinduism, that it had become corrupted with Tantric immorality, a degenaration that had paved the way for the Muslim (and thereafter British) cconquest.

(page 47)

It is probably no accident that the emergence of "Tantrism" as a distinct category of religion occured at roughly the same as the emergence of "Hinduism" itself in the Western imagination.  Even as European scholars began to construct the abstract entity called Hinduism - itself largely "a Western inspired abstraction which until the nineteenth century bore little resemblance of Indian religious belief and practice" - they began to imagine Tantrism as one of its primary, though least adminrable, components.

(page 47)

\... as Ron Inden has persualively argued, India came to be imagined as an essentially passionate, irrational, and erotic world - a land of "disorderly imagination" set in opposition to the progressive, rational, and scientific world of modern Europe.

\...

Tantra formed a critical part of the broader project of imagining India, precisely because Tantra was regarded as the most extreme, irrational emodiment of the worst tendencies in the Indian mind.

(page 48)

Tantra would become an important focus of these shifting attitudes toward the Indian religions and quickly singled out as one the native customs most in need of reform. ... early romantics and the later Indophobes agreed that the Tantras represented the worst and most decadent era in Indian history ...  as Kopf remarks, "contrasting set of images: the golden age, which is Indo-Aryan, classical brahmanical and elitist versus a dark age which medieval .. orgiastic and corrupt."

\...

Indeed, up to the end of the eighteenth century, as we see in the works of of the earliest British authors ... Tantrism had no yet emerged as a distinct category or a definable body of texts.  Even James Mill's The History of British India, makes no mention of the Tantras.  

Rather significantly, the first detailed discussions of the tantras come from Christian missionaries.  

His primary motivations (self admitted) was to "highlight grandeur of Christendom".  He does identigy Sakti-Puja as "Tantra", it became key part of most later European accounts and became a key element of the early genealogy of Tantrism.  Reverend William Ward (1817) called tantras as quintessence of degenerate spirit of licentious appetite.  In H.H. Wilson's (1828) account tantras are now considerd a "singular category", although numerous were supposed to be the same.  Monier-Williams who employed the term "Tantrism" which identifies with "Saktism" and called it the most degenerate form of India religion.  Finally in early twentieth century Tantrism became infamous.  It became conflated into a bizarre mixture of a Black Mass, a Roman Saturnalia, a scene of Dante's Inferno, and a Dionasian sporagmos.  Orientalists also blamed Tantrism for the historical degeneration of Buddhism.

(page 55)

Finally, thanks to Max Muller, Gustav Oppert, and other, the "Aryan race had emerged in the Western imagination as an essentially masculine, aggresive, patriarchical culture, which had progressively invaded and conquered the more passive, feminine, and goddess-worshipping non-Aryan or Dravidian peoples.  ... Not surpisingly, the develiopment of Tantra was quickly identified with the imagined non-Aryan, Dravidian goddess-worshipping culture of pre-Vedic India.  Tantra was the very essence of this "feminine," weak and and passive race. (ms: This basically justified the living and virile British rule of Aryan stock.  Tantra came to represent the epitome of depravity.  Indians assimilated many Orientalist paradigms such as a progressive devolution from the Golden age of the Vedas to the modern, degenarate age of the Tantras).

